---
layout: default
title: Animal Ethics and Ill-Gotten Gains
slug: ae-ill-gains
---
**This past Wednesday**, the city of San Fransisco passed a [resolution](https://sfgov.legistar.com/View.ashx?M=F&ID=3285466&GUID=AF43E996-E799-4A20-83C7-00C6B0860D74) stating that “every whale and dolphin has the right to be free of captivity, and to remain unrestricted in their natural environment.” This is a great win for the rights of non-human animals, but the justification for the resolution highlights an interesting issue in animal ethics.

The first clause of the resolution states that “scientific evidence has shown whales and dolphins to be highly intelligent, sentient, emotional marine mammals that live in families or close-knit socially-oriented groups, lasting generations”. This seems right, but what is interesting about much of this scientific evidence is that was gained, as so much of our information about non-human animals is, through means that, given the results, are ethically suspect.

The issue, more generally, is one of what to do with ill-gotten gains - in this case, ill-gotten knowledge. This question has been raised in other contexts, such as the hypothermia studies (and other scientific experiments) conducted by the [Nazis](http://www.jlaw.com/Articles/NaziMedEx.html). There the question is whether the knowledge gained through the clearly immoral means should be used to further medical and scientific knowledge.

So the issues are similar, but the animal case has a unique component: it is by dent of the ill-gotten gains that we have come to determine that the gains were ill-gotten. It is because (at least some) animals have rich mental and emotional lives that there is now uproar over the confinement and use of such animals. Contrast this, for instance, with the fact that no animal activist is complaining about scientific research on plants, at least for the sake of the plants. Thus, the moral status of these animals is dependent on features of these animals, features that can be (to some degree) discovered by scientific inquiry.

This leads to a paradoxical situation: on one hand, if we do not investigate the lives of animals we cannot justifiably make claims as to their moral status. On the other hand, once we do these investigations it may turn out that we have done something morally wrong. The paradox runs even deeper, then, when we ask whether or not we should use the ill-gotten information to argue for better treatment for animals. At that point, the question of whether or not scientists should use the data from Nazi experiments can be applied - if we think the use of that information is illegitimate because of the immoral means used to discover it, then the use of the scientific information on animals is illegitimate.

But if we did not use the information that was gained, we would not be able to get very far in improving the treatment of animals. In every legal case where the rights of animals are in question, the proponents appeal to the scientific data; in every piece of legislation where the rights of animals are being considered, the proponents appeal to the scientific data; in nearly every argument for the moral status of animals, proponents appeal to the scientific data. Are we all doing something wrong in these cases? And if so, what is the alternative?

Although I am mostly interested in simply motivating the puzzle, I do think there are some things we can say in the direction of a resolution. But let me first note something we may be tempted to say, but is simply a red herring: we can gain the relevant information my acceptable means. For instance, we may think that simply observing animals in their natural environment (as some ethologists do) is sufficient scientific data for grounding the various moral and legal claims. This may be true, but all that shows is that the scientific data that is regularly used, which was not gathered simply by observation in this way, is even more problematic. At least if it was the only way to gather the information, it may be more excusable. And besides, that still doesn’t help us uncover whether or not the use of the problematic scientific data is morally acceptable.

So what can we say by way of resolving the puzzle? I think one approach would be to simply “make the best of a bad situation”. Sure the research was unethical, but failing to use the data to better the lives of future animals just makes it all the worse. Using the data is permissible in our non-ideal world because we are often faced with making decisions that are constrained by past immoral actions (either our own or others’).

Interestingly, this approach has been rejected at least once in the case of the Nazi experiments. When Doctor Robert Pozos attempted to republish the Nazi data on hypothermia in the New England Journal of Medicine, with the goal of getting past much of the trial and error inherent in hypothermia research, the editor vetoed the publication. Similarly, then, ought editors of (especially) animal ethics journals reject any publications that appeal to research that has since been deemed (at least by those in the animal ethics community) unethical?

This problem seems especially poignant for those who reject cost/benefit analysis in the case of animals (or generally). Since they do not think the immoral use of animals can ever be justified by the benefits it may confer, then could they accept making the best of a bad situation? It at least seems more tenuous.